In this lesson, the motivation behind providing tools (and associated system calls) for communication among processes (running on the same system) is discussed along with how to use those tools.

Motivation behind interprocess communication
We appreciate that the primary need for process abstraction is to isolate a program from other programs during execution.
Once the Process Abstraction is in place, now it provides the programmer with a new way to model a system in terms of
Cooperative processes (for example?) &
Competitive processes (for example?).
Therefore comes the need for interaction (communication) among processes in some form or other (i.e., need for breaking the Isolation barrier among processes)
This interaction is called interprocess communication (IPC).

In this lesson, the motivation behind providing tools (and associated system calls) for communication among processes (running on the same system) is discussed along with how to use those tools.

Different types of Interprocess Communication from functional point of view
Let us see what are the different types of communication that we can conceive among processes.

Functionally, the communication can be of following types.

Communication through common variables: That is, 2 or more processes will have common variables. Value assigned to such a common variable by a process can be read/altered  by other processes.
One process produces  data and another consumes it.
Processes use the same file
Transfer of messages
One Process sends a Signal to another process
Synchronization of execution of one process from within another process. That is, from within a process to control which part of another process can (or cannot) execute and when.

In this lesson, the motivation behind providing tools (and associated system calls) for communication among processes (running on the same system) is discussed along with how to use those tools.

To implement variables common (shared) among many processes
Normal Variables are memory locations allocated by compiler.
Memory locations for a shared variable have to be allocated by Kernel (Operating System) and those locations have to be made a part of the process space
That is, the operating system should implement system calls for at least the following tasks.

Creation of a memory segment which will subsequently be shared by many processes.
Attachment of such a shared memory  segment by a process  to its own space.
Linux provides implements the following systems calls for this purpose.
shmget(2) - allocates a shared memory segment (use "man 2 shmget" command to see the manual).
shmat (2) - attaches the shared memory segment to the process space (use "man 2 shmgat" command to see the manual).
shmdt(2) - dettaches the shared memory segment to the process space (use "man 2 shmdt" command to see the manual)
shmctl(2) – controls the shared memory segment (use "man 2 shmctl" command to see the manual).


In this lesson, the motivation behind providing tools (and associated system calls) for communication among processes (running on the same system) is discussed along with how to use those tools.

Congratulations - end of lesson reached
Well done!